January 20, 2021

# Astrocyte Senescence and Alzheimer’s Disease: A Review

[Full Text](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnagi.2020.00148/full)

This review examines findings about astrocyte senescence and its relationship
with AD as well as the potential therapeutic value this research. 
Astrocytes "perform critical roles in regulation of homeostasis and metabolism
of the neurons, mediating uptake and recycling of neurotransmitters. Astrocytes
also play a key role in maintenance of the blood–brain barrier (BBB). They also
act as modulators of synaptic plasticity and transmission, supporting the view
that astrocytes play an integral role in the initiation and progression of
cognitive decline and AD."

Astrocytes undergo stress-induced premature senescence and Aβ oligomers can
induce senescence and promote the production of SASP in human astrocytes. Bhat
et al showed that after exposure to Aβ<sub>1-42</sub> astrocytes show senescence
characteristics, particularly those from AD brains. Senolytic or genetic
ablation of senescent astrocytes and microglia prevents NFT formation and
neurodegeneration in mice.

## Aβ clearance

Astrocytes play an important role in clearing and degrading Aβ and the receptors
involved (low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 1 (LRP1) and
scavenger receptor B1 (SR-B1)) reduce in expression in aged astrocytes. The
appearance of senescent astrocytes was "earlier than Aβ accumulation. The
proinflammatory factors senescent astrocytes secrete can increase APP expression
and Aβ generation in neurons.

## NFT

Neurons carrying NFTs become senescent and cause toxicity to nearby neurons. NFT
containing neurons has increased cellular senescence hallmarks and upregulation
of senescence associated genes. Clearing senescent astrocytes prevented NFT
deposition and hyperphosphorylated tau.

## Synaptics

"astrocytes play a critical role in supporting neuronal growth and modulating
synaptic function and transmission, yet the neuroprotective capacity of
astrocytes decreased during aging".

## Inflammation

Senescent astrocytes may promote inflammation in AD brains and contribute to
pathogenesis.
